i
Rich Dad's
Cashflow quadrant 
Guide to Financial Freedom By Robert T. Kiyosaki 
Rich Dad's 
Cashflow quadrant 
Guide to Financial Freedom By Robert T. Kiyosaki 
™
If you purchase this book without a cover, or purchase a PDF, jpg, or tiff copy of this book,  it is likely stolen property or a counterfeit. In that case, neither the authors, the publisher,  nor any of their employees or agents has received any payment for the copy. Furthermore,  counterfeiting is a known avenue of financial support for organized crime and terrorist  groups. We urge you to please not purchase any such copy and to report any instance of  someone selling such copies to Plata Publishing LLC. 
This publication is designed to provide competent and reliable information regarding the  subject matter covered. However, it is sold with the understanding that the author and  publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, financial, or other professional advice. Laws  and practices often vary from state to state and country to country and if legal or other  expert assistance is required, the services of a professional should be sought. The author and  publisher specifically disclaim any liability that is incurred from the use or application of  the contents of this book. 
Copyright © 1998, 2012 by Robert T. Kiyosaki. All rights reserved. Except as permitted  under the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced,  distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means or stored in a database or retrieval  system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Published by Plata Publishing, LLC  
CASHFLOW, Rich Dad, and CASHFLOW Quadrant are registered trademarks of  CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc. 
 is a registered trademark of  
 CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc. 
Plata Publishing, LLC 
4330 N. Civic Center Plaza 
Suite 100 
Scottsdale, AZ 85251 
(480) 998-6971 
Visit our websites: PlataPublishing.com and RichDad.com  
Printed in the United States of America 
First Edition: 1998 
First Plata Publishing Edition: August 2011 
ISBN: 978-1-61268-005-7 
Cover photo credit: Seymour & Brody Studio
Other Best-selling Books  
by Robert T. Kiyosaki  
Rich Dad Poor Dad 
What the Rich Teach Their Kids About Money – 
That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not 
Rich Dad’s Guide to Investing 
What the Rich Invest in That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not 
Rich Dad’s Rich Kid Smart Kid 
Give Your Child a Financial Head Start 
Rich Dad’s Retire Young Retire Rich 
How to Get Rich Quickly and Stay Rich Forever 
Rich Dad’s Prophecy 
Why the Biggest Stock Market Crash in History Is Still Coming... And How You Can Prepare Yourself and Profit from It! 
Rich Dad’s Success Stories 
Real-Life Success Stories from Real-Life People  
Who Followed the Rich Dad Lessons 
Rich Dad’s Guide to Becoming Rich  
Without Cutting Up Your Credit Cards 
Turn Bad Debt into Good Debt 
Rich Dad’s Who Took My Money? 
Why Slow Investors Lose and Fast Money Wins! 
Rich Dad Poor Dad for Teens 
The Secrets About Money – That You Don’t Learn In School! 
Rich Dad’s Escape from the Rat Race 
How to Become a Rich Kid by Following Rich Dad’s Advice 
Rich Dad’s Before You Quit Your Job 
Ten Real-Life Lessons Every Entrepreneur Should Know  About Building a Multimillion-Dollar Business 
Rich Dad’s Increase Your Financial IQ 
Get Smarter with Your Money 
Conspiracy of the Rich 
The 8 New Rules of Money 
Unfair Advantage 
The Power of Financial Education
My rich dad used to say,  
“You can never have true freedom without financial freedom.”  
He would go on to say,  
“Freedom may be free, but it has a price.” 
This book is dedicated to those who are willing to pay the price. viii
Editor’s Note 
The Times They Are A-Changin’ 
There have been many changes in our economy and the investing  landscape since Rich Dad Poor Dad was first published in 1997. Fourteen  years ago, Robert Kiyosaki challenged conventional wisdom with his  bold statement that “your house is not an asset.” His contrarian views on  money and investing were met with skepticism, criticism, and outrage. 
In 2002, Robert’s book, Rich Dad’s Prophecy, advised that we prepare for  an upcoming financial market crash. In 2006, Robert joined forces with  Donald Trump to write Why We Want You To Be Rich, a book inspired by  their concern for the shrinking middle class in America.  
Robert continues to be a passionate advocate for the importance and  power of financial education. Today, in the wake of the subprime fiasco,  record home foreclosures, and a global economic meltdown that is  still raging, his words seem not only prophetic, but enlightened. Many  skeptics have become believers.  
In preparing the 2011 edition of Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant, Robert  realized two things: that his message and teachings have withstood the test  of time, and that the investment landscape, the world in which investors  operate, has changed dramatically. These changes have affected, and will  continue to affect, those in the I (Investor) quadrant and have fueled  Robert’s decision to update an important section in this book—Chapter  Five: The Five Levels of Investors. 
x
Acknowledgments 
The phenomenal success of Rich Dad Poor Dad has brought  millions of new friends from all over the world.  
Their kind words and friendship—and their amazing stories of  perseverance, passion, and success in applying the Rich Dad principles  to their lives—inspired me to write this book: 
Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Guide to Financial Freedom 
So to my friends, old and new, for their enthusiastic support beyond  my wildest dreams, I say thank you. 
xii
INTRODUCTION 
Contents
Which Quadrant Are You In? ................................................. 1 
Part One The CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Chapter One Why Don’t You Get a Job?.................................................... 11 Chapter Two Different Quadrants, Different People.................................. 23 Chapter Three Why People Choose Security over Freedom.......................... 57 Chapter Four The Three Kinds of Business Systems.................................... 81 Chapter Five The Five Levels of Investors .................................................. 95 Chapter Six You Cannot See Money with Your Eyes .............................. 119 
Part Two Bringing Out the Best in You 
Chapter Seven Becoming Who You Are..................................................... 149 Chapter Eight How Do I Get Rich?........................................................... 165 Chapter Nine Be the Bank, Not the Banker.............................................. 187 
Part Three How To Become a Successful B and I Chapter Ten Take Baby Steps.................................................................. 217 
The Seven Steps to Finding Your Financial Fast Track 
Chapter Eleven Step 1: It’s Time to Mind Your Own Business..................... 233 Chapter Twelve Step 2: Take Control of Your Cash Flow............................. 239 Chapter Thirteen Step 3: Know the Difference Between Risk and Risky......... 247 Chapter Fourteen Step 4: Decide What Kind of Investor You Want to Be.......251 Chapter Fifteen Step 5: Seek Mentors.......................................................... 259 Chapter Sixteen Step 6: Make Disappointment Your Strength….................. 269 Chapter Seventeen Step 7: The Power of Faith.................................................. 275 Chapter Eighteen In Summary........................................................................ 281 
Preface 
WHAT IS YOUR 
LIFE'S GOAL?
“What do you want to be when you grow up?” That is a question  most of us have been asked. 
I had many interests as a kid, and it was easy to choose. If it  sounded exciting and glamorous, I wanted to do it. I wanted to be a  marine biologist, an astronaut, a Marine, a ship’s officer, a pilot, and  a professional football player.  
I was fortunate enough to achieve three of those goals: a Marine  Corps officer, a ship’s officer, and a pilot. 
I knew I did not want to become a teacher, a writer, or an accountant.  I did not want to be a teacher because I did not like school. I did not  want to be a writer because I failed English twice. And I dropped out of  my MBA program because I could not stand accounting. 
Ironically, now that I have grown up, I have become everything  I never wanted to become. Although I disliked school, today I own an  education company. I personally teach around the world because I love  
teaching. Although I failed English twice because I could not write,  today I am best known as an author. My book, Rich Dad Poor Dad, was  on the New York Times best-sellers list for over seven years and is one  of the top three best-selling books in the United States The only books  ahead of it are The Joy of Sex and The Road Less Traveled. Adding one  more irony, Rich Dad Poor Dad and my CASHFLOW board game are a  book and a game about accounting, another subject I struggled with. 
So what does this have to do with the question: “What is your goal  in life?” 
xvi 
Preface
The answer is found in the simple, yet profound, statement by  a Vietnamese monk, Thich Naht Hahn: “The path is the goal.” In  other words, finding your path in life is your goal in life. Your path is  not your profession, how much money you make, your title, or your  successes and failures.  
Finding your path means finding out what you were put here on  this earth to do. What is your life’s purpose? Why were you given this  gift called life? And what is the gift you give back to life? 
Looking back, I know going to school was not about finding my  life’s path. I spent four years in military school, studying and training  to be a ship’s officer. If I had made a career sailing for Standard Oil  on their oil tankers, I would never have found my life’s path. If I had  stayed in the Marines or had gone to fly for the airlines, I would never  have found my life’s path.  
Had I continued on as a ship’s officer or become an airline pilot,  I would never have become an international best-selling author,  been a guest on the Oprah show, written a book with Donald  Trump, or started an international education company that teaches  entrepreneurship and investing throughout the world.  
Finding Your Path 
This CASHFLOW Quadrant book is important because it is about  finding your path in life. As you know, most people are programmed  early in life to “Go to school and get a job.” School is about finding a  job in the E or S quadrant. It is not about finding your life’s path. 
I realize there are people who know exactly what they are going to  do early in life. They grow up knowing they are going to be a doctor,  lawyer, musician, golfer or actor. We have all heard about child  prodigies, kids with exceptional talents. Yet you may notice, these are  professions, not necessarily a life’s path.  
xvii 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
So How Does One Find Their Path in Life? 
My answer is: I wish I knew. If I could wave my magic wand and  your life’s path would magically appear, I would. 
Since I do not have a magic wand nor can I tell you what to do,  the best thing I can do is tell you what I did. And what I did was trust  my intuition, my heart, and my guts. For example, in 1973, returning  from the war, when my poor dad suggested I go back to school, get my  higher degrees, and work for the government, my brain went numb,  my heart went heavy and my gut said, “No way.”  
When he suggested I get my old job back with Standard Oil or fly  for the airlines, again my mind, heart, and gut said no. I knew I was  through sailing and flying, although they were great professions and  the pay was pretty good.  
In 1973 at the age of 26, I was growing up. I had followed my  parent’s advice and gone to school, received my college degree, and had  two professions: a license to be a ship’s officer and a license to fly. The  problem was, they were professions and the dreams of a child. 
At the age of 26, I was old enough to know that education is a process.  For example, when I wanted to be a ship’s officer, I went to a school that  turned out ships’ officers. And when I wanted to learn to fly, I went to  Navy flight school, a two-year process that turns non-pilots into pilots.  I was cautious about my next educational process. I wanted to know what  I was going to become before I started my next educational process. 
Traditional schools had been good to me. I had achieved my  childhood professions. Reaching adulthood was confusing because  there were no signs saying, “This is the way.” I knew what I didn’t want  to do, but I did not know what I wanted to do. 
It would have been simple if all I wanted was a new profession.  If I had wanted to be a medical doctor, I would have gone to medical  school. If I had wanted to be a lawyer, I would have gone to law  school. But I knew there was more to life than just going to school to  gain another professional credential.  
I did not realize it at the time, but at 26 years of age, I was now  looking for my path in life, not my next profession. 
xviii 
Preface
A Different Education 
In 1973, in my last year of active duty flying for the Marine  Corps when I was stationed near home in Hawaii, I knew I wanted  to follow in my rich dad’s footsteps. While in the Marines, I signed  
up for real estate courses and business courses on the weekends,  preparing to become an entrepreneur in the B and I quadrants.  At the same time, upon a friend’s recommendation of a friend,  I signed up for a personal-development course, hoping to find out  who I really was. A personal-development course is non-traditional  education because I was not taking it for credits or grades. I did not  know what I was going to learn, as I did when I signed up for real  estate courses. All I knew was that it was time to take courses to find  out about me. 
In my first weekend course, the instructor drew this simple  diagram on the flip chart: 
PHYSICAL 
MENTAL 
EMOTIONAL 
SPIRITUAL 
xix 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
With the diagram complete, the instructor turned and said,  “To develop into a whole human being, we need mental, physical,  emotional, and spiritual education.” 
Listening to her explanation, it was clear to me that traditional  schools were primarily about developing students mentally. That is  why so many students who do well in school, do not do well in real  life, especially in the world of money. 
As the course progressed over the weekend, I discovered why I  disliked school. I realized that I loved learning, but hated school. Traditional education was a great environment for the “A”  
students, but it was not the environment for me. Traditional education  was crushing my spirit, trying to motivate me with the emotion of  fear: the fear of making mistakes, the fear of failing, and the fear of not  getting a job. They were programming me to be an employee in the E  or S quadrant. I realized that traditional education is not the place for  a person who wants to be an entrepreneur in the B and I quadrants. 
This may be why so many entrepreneurs never finish school— entrepreneurs like Thomas Edison, founder of General Electric; Henry  Ford, founder of Ford Motor Company; Steve Jobs, founder of Apple;  Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft; Walt Disney, founder of Disneyland;  and Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook. 
As the day went on and the instructor went deeper and deeper into  these four types of personal development, I realized I had spent most  of my life in very harsh educational environments. After four years at  an all-male military academy and five years as a Marine pilot, I was  pretty strong mentally and physically. As a Marine pilot, I was strong  emotionally and spiritually, but all on the macho-male development  side. I had no gentle side, no female energy. After all, I was trained to  be Marine Corps officer, emotionally calm under pressure, prepared to  kill, and spiritually prepared to die for my country. 
If you ever saw the movie “Top Gun” starring Tom Cruise, you get  a glimpse into the masculine world and bravado of military pilots. I  loved that world. I was good in that world. It was a modern-day world  of knights and warriors. It was not a world for wimps. 
xx 
Preface
In the seminar, I went into my emotions and briefly touched my  spirit. I cried a lot because I had a lot to cry about. I had done and  seen things no one should ever be asked to do. During the seminar,  I hugged a man, something I had never done before, not even with  my father. 
On Sunday night, it was difficult leaving this self-development  workshop. The seminar had been a gentle, loving, honest environment.  Monday morning was a shock to once again be surrounded by young  egotistical pilots, dedicated to flying, killing and dying for country. 
After that weekend seminar, I knew it was time to change. I knew  developing myself emotionally and spiritually to become a kinder,  gentler, and more compassionate person would be the hardest thing  I could do. It went against all my years at the military academy and  flight school. 
I never returned to traditional education again. I had no desire  to study for grades, degrees, promotions, or credentials again. From  then on, if I did attend a course or school, I went to learn, to become  a better person. I was no longer in the paper chase of grades, degrees,  and credentials.  
Growing up in a family of teachers, your grades, the high school  and college you graduated from, and your advanced degrees were  everything. Like the medals and ribbons on a Marine pilot’s chest,  advanced degrees and brand-name schools were the status and the  stripes that educators wore on their sleeves. In their minds, people  who did not finish high school were the unwashed, the lost souls of  life. Those with master’s degrees looked down on those with only  bachelor degrees. Those with a PhD were held in reverence. At the age  of 26, I knew I would never return to that world. 
Editor’s Note: In 2009, Robert received an honorary PhD in  
entrepreneurship from prestigious San Ignacio de Loyola in  
Lima, Peru. The few other recipients of this award are political  
leaders, such as the former President of Spain.  
xxi 
Finding My Path 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
I know some of you are now asking: Why is he spending so much  time talking about non-traditional education courses? The reason is, that first personal-development seminar rekindled  my love of learning, but not the type of learning that is taught in  school. Once that seminar was over, I became a seminar junkie, going  from seminar to seminar, finding out more about the connection  between my body, my mind, my emotions, and my spirit. The more I studied, the more curious about traditional education  I became. I began to ask questions such as: 
•  Why do so many kids hate school? 
•  Why do so few kids like school? 
•  Why are many highly educated people not successful in the real world? 
•  Does school prepare you for the real world? 
•  Why did I hate school but love learning? 
•  Why are most schoolteachers poor? 
•  Why do schools teach us little about money? 
Those questions led me to become a student of education outside  the hallowed walls of the school system. The more I studied, the more  I understood why I did not like school and why schools failed to serve  most of its students, even the “A” students. 
My curiosity touched my spirit, and I became an entrepreneur  in education. If not for this curiosity, I might never have become an  author and a developer of financial-education games. My spiritual  education led me to my path in life. 
It seems that our paths in life are not found in our minds. Our  path in life is to find out what is in our hearts. 
This does not mean a person cannot find their path in traditional  education. I am sure many do. I am just saying that I doubt I would  have found my path in traditional school.  
xxii 
Preface
Why Is a Path Important? 
We all know people who make a lot of money, but hate their  work. We also know people who do not make a lot of money and  hate their work. And we all know people who just work for money. 
A classmate of mine from the Merchant Marine Academy also  realized he did not want to spend his life at sea. Rather than sail for  the rest of his life, he went to law school after graduation, spending  three more years becoming a lawyer and entering private practice in  the S quadrant.  
He died in his early fifties. He had become a very successful,  unhappy lawyer. Like me, he had two professions by the time he was  26. Although he hated being a lawyer, he continued being a lawyer  because he had a family, kids, a mortgage, and bills to pay.  
A year before he died, I met him at a class reunion in New York.  He was a bitter man. “All I do is sweep up behind rich guys like you.  They pay me nothing. I hate what I do and who I work for.” “Why don’t you do something else?” I asked. 
“I can’t afford to stop working. My first child is entering college.” He died of a heart attack before she graduated.  
He made a lot of money via his professional training, but he was  emotionally angry, spiritually dead, and soon his body followed. I realize this is an extreme example. Most people do not hate what  they do as much as my friend did. Yet it illustrates the problem when  a person is trapped in a profession and unable to find their path.  To me, this is the shortcoming of traditional education. Millions  of people leave school, only to be trapped in jobs they do not like.  They know something is missing in life. Many people are also trapped  financially, earning just enough to survive, wanting to earn more but  not knowing what to do. 
Without awareness of the other quadrants, many people go back  to school and look for new professions or pay raises in the E or S  quadrant, unaware of the world of the B and I quadrants. 
xxiii 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
My Reason for Becoming a Teacher 
My primary reason for becoming a teacher in the B quadrant was a  desire to provide financial education. I wanted to make this education  available to anyone who wanted to learn, regardless of how much money  they had or what their grade-point averages were. That is why The Rich  Dad Company started with the CASHFLOW game. This game can teach  in places I could never go. The beauty of the game is that it was designed  to have people teach people. There is no need for an expensive teacher  or classroom. The CASHFLOW game is now translated into over sixteen  languages, reaching millions of people all over the world. 
Today, The Rich Dad Company offers financial-education courses as  well as the services of coaches and mentors to support a person’s financial  education. Our programs are especially important for anyone wanting to  evolve out of the E and S quadrants into the B and I quadrants. 
There is no guarantee that everyone will make it to the B and I  quadrants, yet they will know how to access those quadrants if they want to. 
Change Is Not Easy 
For me, changing quadrants was not easy. It was hard work  mentally, but more so emotionally and spiritually. Growing up in a  family of highly educated employees in the E quadrant, I carried their  values of education, job security, benefits, and a government pension.  In many ways, my family values made my transition difficult. I had to  shut out their warnings, concerns, and criticisms about becoming an  entrepreneur and investor. Some of their values I had to discount were: 
•  “But you have to have a job.” 
•  “You’re taking too many risks.” 
•  “What if you fail?” 
•  “Just go back to school and get your masters degree.” •  “Become a doctor. They make a lot of money.” 
•  “The rich are greedy.” 
xxiv 
Preface
•  “Why is money so important to you?” 
•  “Money won’t make you happy.” 
•  “Just live below your means.” 
•  “Play it safe. Don’t go for your dreams.” 
Diet and Exercise 
I mention emotional and spiritual development because that is  what it takes to make a permanent change in life. For example, it  rarely works to tell an overweight person, “Just eat less and exercise  more.” Diet and exercise may make sense mentally, but most people  who are overweight do not eat because they are hungry. They eat to  feed an emptiness in their emotions and their soul. When a person  goes on a diet-and-exercise program, they are only working on their  mind and their body. Without emotional development and spiritual  strength, the overweight person may go on a diet for six months  and lose a ton of weight, only to put even more weight back on later. 
The same is true for changing quadrants. Saying to yourself,  “I’m going to become an entrepreneur in the B quadrant,” is as futile  as a chain smoker saying, “Tomorrow I’m going to quit smoking.”  Smoking is a physical addiction caused by emotional and spiritual  challenges. Without emotional and spiritual support, the smoker  will always be a smoker. The same is true for an alcoholic, a sex  addict, or a chronic shopper. Most addictions are attempts to find  happiness in people’s souls. 
This is why my company offers courses for the mind and body,  but also coaches and mentors to support the emotional and spiritual  transitions. 
A few people are able to make the journey alone, but I was not  one of them. If not for a coach like my rich dad and the support  of my wife Kim, I would not have made it. There were so many  times I wanted to quit and give up. If not for Kim and my rich dad,  I would have quit. 
xxv 
Why “A” Students Fail 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
Looking at the diagram again, it is easy to see why so many “A”  students fail in the world of money. 
BODY 
MIND 
EMOTION 
SPIRIT 
A person may be highly educated mentally, but if they are not  educated emotionally, their fear will often stop their body from doing  what it must do. That is why so many “A” students get stuck in “analysis  paralysis,” studying every little detail, but failing to do anything. 
This “analysis paralysis” is caused by our educational system  punishing students for making mistakes. If you think about it,  “A” students are “A” students simply because they made the fewest  mistakes. The problem with that emotional psychosis is that, in the  real world, people who take action are the ones who make the most  mistakes and learn from them to win in the game of life. 
Just look at Presidents Clinton and Bush. Clinton could not admit  he had sex and Bush could not recall any mistakes he made during his  presidency. Making mistakes is human, but lying about your mistakes  is criminal, a criminal act known as perjury.  
xxvi 
Preface 
When criticized for making 1,014 mistakes before creating the  electric light bulb, Thomas Edison said, “I did not fail 1,014 times.  I successfully found out what did not work 1,014 times.”  
In other words, the reason so many people fail to achieve success  is because they fail to fail enough times. 
Looking at the diagram again, 
BODY
MIND 
EMOTION 
SPIRIT 
one of the reasons so many people cling to job security is because they  lack emotional education. They let fear stop them. 
One of the best things about military school and the Marine  Corps is that these organizations spend a lot of time developing  young men and women spiritually, emotionally, mentally, and  physically. Although it was a tough education, it was a complete  education, preparing us to do a nasty job. 
The reason I created the CASHFLOW game is because the game  educates the whole person. The game is a better teaching tool than  reading or lecture, simply because the game involves the body, mind,  emotions, and spirit of the player. 
The game is designed for players to make as many mistakes as  possible with play money, and then learn from those mistakes. To me,  this is a more humane way to learn about money. 
xxvii 
The Path Is the Goal 
CASHFLOW Quadrant
Today, there are thousands of CASHFLOW clubs all over the world.  One reason why CASHFLOW clubs are important is because they are  a shelter from the storm, a way station on the path of life. By joining  a CASHFLOW club, you get to meet people like you, people who are  committed to making changes, not just talking about change. 
Unlike school, there is not a requirement of past academic success.  All that is asked is a sincere desire to learn and make changes. In the  game, you will make a lot of mistakes in different financial situations  and will learn from your mistakes, using play money.  
CASHFLOW clubs are not for those who want to get rich quick.  CASHFLOW clubs are there to support the long-term mental, emotional,  spiritual, physical, and financial changes a person needs to go through. We  
all change and evolve at different rates of speed so you are encouraged to  go at your own speed.  
After playing the game with others a few times, you will have a  better idea of what your next step should be and which of the four asset  classes (business, real estate, paper assets, or commodities) is best for you.  
In Conclusion 
Finding one’s path is not necessarily easy. Even today, I do not  really know if I am on my path or not. As you know, we all get lost at  times, and it is not always easy to find our way back. 
If you feel you are not in the right quadrant for you, or you are not  on your life’s path, I encourage you to search your heart and find your  path in life. You may know it is time to change if you are saying things  like the following statements: 
•  “I’m working with dead people.” 
•  “I love what I do, but I wish I could make more money.” •  “I can’t wait for the weekend.” 
•  “I want to do my own thing.” 
•  “Is it quitting time yet?” 
xxviii 
Preface
My sister is a Buddhist nun. Her path is to support the Dalai  Lama, a path that pays nothing. Yet, although she earns little, it does  not mean she has to be a poor nun. She has her own rental property  
and investments in gold and silver. Her strength of spirit and her  financially educated mind allow her to follow her life’s path without  taking a vow of poverty. 
In many ways, it was a good thing I was labeled stupid in school.  Although emotionally painful, that pain allowed me to find my life’s  path as a teacher. And like my sister, the nun, just because I am a  teacher does not mean I have to be a poor teacher. 
Repeating what Thich Naht Hahn said: “The path is the goal.” 
xxix 
Introduction 
WHICH QUADRANT ARE YOU IN?  
The CASHFLOW Quadrant®  
is a way to categorize people  
based on where their money comes from.
Are you financially free? If your life has come to a financial fork in  the road, Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant was written for you. If  you want to take control of what you do today in order to change your  financial destiny, this book will help you chart your course.  This is the CASHFLOW Quadrant. The letters in each quadrant represent: 
E for employee 
S for small business or self-employed 
B for big business 
I for investor 
1 
Introduction 
Each of us resides in at least one of the four sections (quadrants)  of the CASHFLOW Quadrant. Where we are is determined by where  our cash comes from. Many of us are employees who rely on paychecks,  while others are self-employed. Employees and self-employed individuals  reside on the left side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant. The right side  is for individuals who receive their cash from businesses they own or  investments they own. 
The CASHFLOW Quadrant is an easy way to categorize people  based on where their money comes from. Each quadrant within the  CASHFLOW Quadrant is unique, and the people within each one  share common characteristics. The quadrants will show you where  you are today and will help you chart a course for where you want to  be in the future as you choose your own path to financial freedom.  While financial freedom can be found in all four of the quadrants, the  skills of a B or I will help you reach your financial goals more quickly.  Successful E’s need to become successful I’s to ensure their financial  security during retirement. 
What Do You Want to Be When You Grow Up? This book is, in many ways, Part II of my book, Rich Dad Poor  Dad. For those of you who may not have read Rich Dad Poor Dad, it is about the different lessons my two dads taught me about money  and life choices. One was my real dad, and the other was my best  friend’s dad. One was highly educated and the other was a high  school dropout. One was poor, and the other was rich. 
2 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Poor Dad’s Advice 
Growing up, my highly educated, but poor, dad always said,  “Go to school, get good grades, and find a safe secure job.” He was  recommending a life path that looked like this: 
SCHOOL
Poor dad recommended that I become either a well-paid E, employee,  or a well-paid S, self-employed professional, such as a medical doctor,  lawyer, or accountant. My poor dad was very concerned about a steady  paycheck, benefits, and job security. That’s why he was a well-paid  government official, the head of education for the State of Hawaii. 
3 
Introduction 
Rich Dad’s Advice  
My uneducated, but rich, dad offered very different advice.  He said, “Go to school, graduate, build businesses, and become a  successful investor.” He was recommending a life path that looked  like this: 
SCHOOL
This book is about the mental, emotional, and educational  process I went through in following my rich dad’s advice. 
Who Is This Book For? 
This book is written for people who are ready to change quadrants,  especially for individuals who are currently in the E and S categories and  are contemplating moving to the B or I category. This book is for people  who are ready to move beyond job security and begin to achieve financial  security. It’s not an easy life path, but the prize at the end of the road,  financial freedom, is worth the journey.  
When I was 12 years old, rich dad told me a simple story that guided  me to great wealth and financial freedom. It was his way of explaining the  difference between the left side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant, the E and  S quadrants, and the right side, or the B and I quadrants. The story goes  
like this: 
4 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
“Once upon a time there was this quaint little village. It was a great  place to live except for one problem. The village had no water unless it  rained. To solve this problem once and for all, the village elders asked  contractors to submit bids to deliver water to the village on a daily basis.  Two people volunteered to take on the task, and the elders awarded the  contract to both of them. They felt that a little competition would keep  prices low and ensure a backup supply of water. 
“The first person who won the contract, Ed, immediately ran out,  bought two galvanized steel buckets and began running back and forth  to the lake which was a mile away. He immediately began making  money as he labored morning to dusk, hauling water from the lake with  his two buckets. He would empty them into the large concrete holding  tank the village had built. Each morning he had to get up before the rest  of the village awoke to make sure there was enough water for the people.  It was hard work, but he was very happy to be making money and for  having one of the two exclusive contracts for this business. 
“The second winning contractor, Bill, disappeared for a while.  He wasn’t seen for months, which made Ed very happy, since he had  no competition.  
“Instead of buying two buckets to compete with Ed, Bill wrote a  business plan, created a corporation, found four investors, employed  a president to do the work, and returned six months later with a  construction crew. Within a year, his team had built a large-volume  stainless-steel pipeline which connected the village to the lake. 
“At the grand-opening celebration, Bill announced that his  water was cleaner than Ed’s water. Bill knew that the villagers had  complained about the water’s lack of cleanliness. Bill also announced  that he could supply the village with water 24 hours a day, 7 days a  week. Ed could only deliver water on weekdays because he didn’t want  to work on weekends. Then Bill announced that he would charge  75 percent less than Ed did for this higher-quality, more-reliable water.  The villagers cheered and immediately ran for the faucet at the end  of Bill’s pipeline. 
“In order to compete, Ed immediately lowered his rates by  75 percent, bought two more buckets, added covers to his buckets 
5 
Introduction 
and began hauling four buckets each trip. In order to provide better  service, he hired his two sons to give him a hand on the night shift  and on weekends. When his boys went off to college, he said to them,  ‘Hurry back because someday this business will belong to you.’ 
“For some reason, his two sons never returned. Eventually, Ed had  employees and union problems. The union demanded higher wages  and better benefits and wanted its members to only haul one bucket  at a time. 
“Meanwhile, Bill realized that if this village needed water, then  other villages must need water too. He rewrote his business plan and  went off to sell his high-speed, high-volume, low-cost, clean-water  delivery system to villages throughout the world. He only makes a  penny per bucket of water delivered, but he delivers billions of  buckets of water every day. Whether he works or not, billions of  people consume billions of buckets of water, and all that money pours  into his bank account. Bill developed a pipeline to deliver money to  himself, as well as water to the villages. 
“Bill lived happily ever after. Ed worked hard for the rest of his  life and had financial problems forever after. The end.” That story about Bill and Ed has guided me for years. It has  assisted me in my life’s decision-making process. I often ask myself: “Am I building a pipeline or hauling buckets?” 
“Am I working hard, or am I working smart?” 
And the answers to those questions have made me financially free. That is what this book is about. It’s about what it takes to become  a B and an I. It’s for people who are tired of hauling buckets and are  ready to build pipelines for cash to flow into their pockets.
6 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
This Book Is Divided into Three Parts 
Part One The first part of this book focuses on the core differences  between people in the four quadrants. It shows why certain people  gravitate to certain quadrants and often get stuck there without  realizing it. It will help you identify where you are today in the  quadrant and where you want to be in five years. 
Part Two The second part of this book is about personal change. It’s  more about who you have to be, instead of what you have to do. 
Part Three The third part of this book explains how to find success on  the right side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant. I will share more of  my rich dad’s secrets on the skills required to be a successful B and I.  It will help you choose your own path to financial freedom. 
Throughout Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant, I continue to stress  the importance of financial intelligence. If you want to operate on the  right side, the B- and I-quadrant side, you must be smarter than if you  choose to stay on the left side, the E- and S-quadrant side. To be  a B or I, you must be able to control the direction of your cash flow.  
This book is written for people who are ready to make changes in  their lives to move beyond job security and begin to build their own  pipelines to achieve financial freedom.  
We are in the Information Age which offers more opportunities  for financial reward than ever before. Individuals with the skills of  the B’s and I’s will be able to identify and seize those opportunities.  To be successful in the Information Age, a person needs information  from all four quadrants. Unfortunately, our schools are still in the  Industrial Age and still prepare students for only the left side of the  CASHFLOW Quadrant. 
If you’re looking for new answers to move forward in the Information  Age, this book is for you. It doesn’t have all the answers, but it will share  the deep personal and guiding insights I gained as I traveled from the  E and S side to the B and I side. 
7 
Part One 
THE CASHFLOW  QUADRANT
Chapter One 
WHY DON’T YOU  
GET A JOB? 
To someone who values a job, it’s difficult to explain  why you might not want one. 
In 1985, my wife Kim and I were homeless. We were unemployed  and had little money left in savings. Our credit cards were exhausted,  and we lived in an old brown Toyota with reclining seats that served as  beds. At the end of one week, the harsh reality of who we were, what  we were doing, and where we were headed began to sink in. 
Our homelessness lasted another two weeks. When a friend  realized our desperate financial situation, she offered us a room in  her basement. We lived there for nine months. 
We kept our situation quiet. For the most part, Kim and I looked  quite normal on the surface. When friends and family were informed  of our plight, the first question was always, “Why don’t you get a job?” 
At first, we attempted to explain, but we usually failed to clarify  our reasons. To someone who values a job, it’s difficult to explain why  you might not want one. 
We did odd jobs occasionally and earned a few dollars here and  there, but we did that only to keep food in our stomachs and gas in  the car. Those few extra dollars were only fuel to keep us going toward  our singular goal. I must admit that during moments of deep personal  doubt, the idea of a safe, secure job with a paycheck was appealing.
11 
Chapter One 
But because job security wasn’t what we were looking for, we kept  pushing on, living day to day, on the brink of the financial abyss. That year, 1985, was the worst of our lives as well as one of the  longest. Anyone who says that money isn’t important obviously has  not been without it for long. Kim and I fought and argued often. Fear,  uncertainty, and hunger shortens the human emotional fuse, and often  we fight with the person who loves us the most. Yet love held the two  of us together, and our bond as a couple grew stronger because of the  adversity. We knew where we were going. We just didn’t know if we  would ever get there. 
We knew we could always find safe, secure, high-paying jobs. Both  of us were college graduates with good job skills and solid work ethics.  But we weren’t after job security. We wanted financial freedom. 
By 1989, we were millionaires. Although financially successful in  some people’s eyes, we still hadn’t reached our goal of true financial  freedom. That took until 1994. By then, we never had to work again  for the rest of our lives. Barring any unforeseen financial disaster, we  were both financially free. Kim was 37 and I was 47. 
It Doesn’t Take Money to Make Money 
I started this chapter with a discussion about our being homeless  and having nothing in 1985 because I often hear people say, “It takes  money to make money.” 
I disagree. To get from homeless in 1985, to rich in 1989, and  then to financial freedom by 1994, didn’t take money. We had no  money when we started, and we were in debt. 
It also doesn’t take a good formal education. I have a college  degree, and I can honestly say that achieving financial freedom had  nothing to do with what I learned in college. I didn’t find much  demand for my years of studying calculus, spherical trigonometry,  chemistry, physics, French, and English literature. 
Many successful people have left school without receiving a college  degree—people such as Thomas Edison, founder of General Electric;  Henry Ford, founder of Ford Motor Co.; Bill Gates, founder of 
12 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Microsoft; Ted Turner, founder of CNN; Michael Dell, founder of  Dell Computers; Steve Jobs, founder of Apple Computer; and Ralph  Lauren, founder of Polo. A college education is important for traditional  professions, but not for how these people found great wealth. They  developed their own successful businesses, and that was what Kim  and I were striving for. 
So What Does It Take? 
I am often asked, “If it doesn’t take money to make money, and  schools don’t teach you how to become financially free, then what  does it take?” 
My answer: It takes a dream, a lot of determination, a willingness  to learn quickly, and the ability to use your God-given assets properly  and to know which quadrant in the CASHFLOW Quadrant is the  right one for you to generate your income. 
What Is the CASHFLOW Quadrant? 
The diagram below is the CASHFLOW Quadrant. The letters  in each quadrant represent: 
E for employee 
S for small business or self-employed 
B for big business  
I for investor
13 
Chapter One 
From Which Quadrant Do You Generate Your Income? The CASHFLOW Quadrant represents the different methods  by which income or money is generated. For example, an employee  earns money by holding a job and working for a person or a company.  Self-employed people earn money working for themselves. A business  owner owns a business that generates money, and investors earn money  from their various investments—in other words, money generating  more money. 
Different methods of income generation require different frames  of mind, different technical skills, and different educational paths.  Different people are attracted to different quadrants. 
While money is all the same, the way it’s earned can be vastly  different. If you begin to look at the four different labels for each  quadrant, you might want to ask yourself, “Which quadrant do  I generate the majority of my income from?” 
Each quadrant is different. To generate income from different  quadrants requires different skills and a different personality, even  if the person found in each quadrant is the same. Changing from  quadrant to quadrant is like playing golf in the morning and then  attending the ballet at night. 
You Can Earn Income in All Four Quadrants Most of us have the potential to generate income from all four  quadrants. Which quadrant you or I choose to earn our primary  income from is not so much dependent upon what we learned in  school. It’s more about who we are at the core—our values, strengths,  weaknesses, and interests. These core differences attract us to, or repel  us from, each quadrant. 
Yet, regardless of what type of work we perform, we can still work  in all four quadrants. For example, a medical doctor could choose  to earn income as an E and join the staff of a large hospital or an  insurance company, work for the government in the public-health  field, or become a military doctor.
14 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
This same doctor could also decide to earn income as an S and  start a private practice, setting up an office, hiring staff, and building  a private list of patients. 
Or the doctor could decide to become a B and own a clinic or  laboratory and have other doctors on staff. This doctor probably would  hire a business manager to run the organization. In this case, the doctor  would own the business but not have to work in it. The doctor also  could decide to own a business that has nothing to do with the medical  field while still practicing medicine somewhere else. In this case, the  doctor would be earning income as both an E and as a B. 
As an I, the doctor could generate income from being an investor  in someone else’s business or in vehicles like the stock market, bond  market, and real estate. 
The important words are “generate income from.” It’s not so much  what we do, but more how we generate income. 
Different Methods of Income Generation 
More than anything, it’s the internal differences of our core  values, strengths, weaknesses, and interests that affect which quadrant  we decide to generate our income from. Some people love being  employees, while others hate it. Some people love owning companies  but don’t want to run them. Others love owning companies and also  love running them. Some people love investing, while others can’t  get past the risk of losing money. Most of us are a little of each of  these characters. Being successful in the four quadrants often means  redirecting some internal core values. 
You Can Be Rich or Poor in All Four Quadrants It is important to note that you can be rich or poor in all four  quadrants. There are people who earn millions and people who go  bankrupt in each of the quadrants. Being in one quadrant or another  does not necessarily guarantee financial success.
15 
Chapter One 
Not All Quadrants Are Equal 
By knowing the different features of each quadrant, you’ll have a  better idea as to which quadrant, or quadrants, might be best for you. For example, one of the many reasons I chose to work predominantly  in the B and I quadrants is because of tax advantages. For most people  working on the left side of the quadrant, there are few legal tax breaks  available. Yet legal tax breaks abound on the right side of the quadrant.  By working to generate income in the B and I quadrants, I could acquire  money faster and keep that money working for me longer without losing  large chunks of it to the government in the form of taxes. 
Different Ways of Earning Money 
When people ask why Kim and I were homeless, I tell them it was  because of what my rich dad taught me about money. For me, money  is important, yet I didn’t want to spend my life working for it. That  is why I didn’t want a job. If we were going to be responsible citizens,  Kim and I wanted to have our money work for us, rather than spend  our lives physically working for money. 
That is why the CASHFLOW Quadrant is important. It depicts the  different ways money is generated. There are ways of being responsible  and creating money other than physically working for it. 
Different Fathers—Different Ideas about Money My highly educated dad had a strong belief that the love of  money was evil and that excessive profit meant you were greedy. He  felt embarrassed when the newspapers published how much he made  because he felt he was overcompensated in comparison to the teachers  who worked for him. He was a good, honest, hardworking man who  did his best to defend his point of view that money wasn’t important  to his life.
16 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
My highly educated, yet poor, dad constantly said, 
•  “I’m not that interested in money.” 
•  “I’ll never be rich.” 
•  “I can’t afford it.” 
•  “Investing is risky.” 
•  “Money isn’t everything.” 
Money Supports Life 
My rich dad had a different point of view. He thought it foolish  to spend your life working for money and to pretend that money wasn’t  important. Rich dad believed that life was more important than money,  but that money was important for supporting life. He often said, “You  
only have so many hours in a day, and you can only work so hard. So  why work hard for money? Learn to have money and people work hard  for you, and you can be free to do the things that are important.” To  my rich dad, what was important was: 
•  Having lots of time to raise his kids. 
•  Having money to donate to charities and projects he supported. •  Bringing jobs and financial stability to the community. •  Having time and money to take care of his health. 
•  Being able to travel the world with his family. 
“Those things take money,” said rich dad. “That’s why money is  important to me. Money is important, but I don’t want to spend my  life working for it.”
17 
Chapter One 
Choosing Quadrants 
One reason Kim and I focused on the B and I quadrants while we  were homeless was because I had more training and education in those  quadrants. It was because of my rich dad’s guidance that I knew the  different financial and professional advantages of each quadrant. For  me, the quadrants on the right side, the B and I quadrants, offered the  best opportunity for long-term financial success and financial freedom. Also, at age 37, I had experienced successes and failures in all four  quadrants which allowed me some degree of understanding about my  own personal temperament, likes, dislikes, strengths, and weaknesses.  I knew which quadrants I did best in. 
Parents Are Teachers 
When I was a young boy, my rich dad often referred to the  CASHFLOW Quadrant. He would explain to me the difference  between someone who was successful on the left side versus the right  side. But being young, I really didn’t pay much attention to what he  said. I didn’t understand the difference between an employee’s mindset  and a business owner’s mindset. I was just trying to survive school. 
Yet I did hear his words, and soon they began to make sense. Having  two dynamic and successful father figures around me gave meaning to  what each was saying. But it was what they were doing that allowed me  to begin to notice the differences between the E-S side and the B-I side.  At first, the differences were subtle. Then they became glaring. 
For example, one painful lesson I learned as a young boy was simply  how much time one dad had available to spend with me versus the  other. As the success and prominence of both dads grew, it was obvious  that one dad had less and less time to spend with his wife and four  children. My real dad was always on the road, at meetings, or dashing  off to the airport for more meetings. The more successful he got, the  fewer dinners we had together as a family. On weekends, he was at home  in his crowded little office, buried under paperwork. 
On the other hand, my rich dad had more and more free time as  his success grew. One of the reasons I learned so much about money, 
18 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
finance, business, and life was simply because my rich dad had more  and more free time for his children and me. 
Another example is that both dads made more and more money  as they became successful, but my real dad, the educated one, also got  further into debt. So he’d work harder and suddenly find himself in a  higher income-tax bracket. His banker and accountant would then tell  him to buy a bigger house for the so-called “tax break.” My dad would  follow the advice and buy a bigger house, and soon he was working  harder than ever so he could make more money to pay for it. Ultimately,  this just took him even further away from his family. 
My rich dad was different. He made more and more money but  paid less in taxes. He also had bankers and accountants, but he wasn’t  getting the same advice my highly educated dad was getting. 
The Main Reason 
The driving force, however, that wouldn’t allow me to stay on the  left side of the Quadrant was what happened to my highly educated but  poor dad at the peak of his career. 
In the early 1970s, I was already out of college and in Pensacola,  Florida, going through pilot training for the Marine Corps before a  tour in Vietnam. My educated dad was now the superintendent of  education for the State of Hawaii and a member of the governor’s staff.  One evening, he phoned me with some interesting news. 
“Son,” he said, “I’m going to resign from my job and run for  lieutenant governor of Hawaii for the Republican party.” I gulped and then said, “You’re going to run for office against  your boss?” 
“That’s right,” he replied. 
“Why?” I asked. “Republicans don’t have a chance in Hawaii.  The Democratic party and the labor unions are too strong.” “I know, Son. I know that we don’t have a prayer of winning.  Judge Samuel King will be the candidate for governor, and I will be  his running mate.”
19 
Chapter One 
“Why?” I asked again. “Why go against your boss if you know  you’re going to lose?” 
“Because my conscience won’t let me do anything else. The games  these politicians are playing disturb me.” 
“Are you saying they’re corrupt?” I asked. 
“I don’t want to say that,” said my real dad. He was an honest and  moral man who rarely spoke badly about anyone. Yet I could tell from  his voice that he was angry and upset when he said, “I’ll just say that  my conscience bothers me when I see what goes on behind the scenes.  I couldn’t live with myself if I turned a blind eye and did nothing. My  job and paycheck aren’t as important as my conscience.” 
After a long silence, I realized that my dad’s mind was made up.  “Good luck,” I said quietly. “I’m proud of you for your courage, and  I’m proud to be your son.” 
My dad and the Republican ticket were crushed, as expected. The  re-elected governor sent the word out that my dad was never to work  again for the State of Hawaii, and he never did. At the age of 54, my  dad went looking for a job, and I was on my way to Vietnam. 
When he was middle-aged, my dad was hunting for a job. He went  from jobs with big titles and low pay to other jobs with big titles and  low pay. He was a tall, brilliant, and dynamic man who was no longer  welcome in the only world he knew, the world of government employees.  He tried starting several small businesses. He was a consultant for a while  and even bought a famous franchise, but all his efforts failed.  
As he grew older and his strength slipped away, so did his drive to  start over again. His lack of will became even more pronounced after  each business failure. He was a successful E trying to survive as an S, a  quadrant in which he had no training or experience and for which he had  no heart. He loved the world of public education, but he couldn’t find a  way to get back in. The ban on his employment in the state government  was silently, but firmly, in place.  
If not for Social Security and Medicare, the last years of his life  would have been a complete disaster. He died frustrated and a little  angry, yet he died with a clear conscience.
20 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
So what kept me going in the darkest of hours? It was the haunting  memory of my educated dad sitting at home, waiting for the phone  to ring, trying to succeed in the world of business, a world he knew  nothing about. That, and the joyous memory of seeing my rich dad  grow happier and more successful as his years went on, inspired me.  Instead of declining at age 54, rich dad blossomed. He had become  rich years before that, but now he was becoming mega-rich. He was  constantly in the newspapers as the man who was buying up Waikiki  and Maui. His years of methodically building businesses and investing  were paying off, and he was on his way to becoming one of the richest  men in the Islands. 
Small Differences Become Large Differences 
Because my rich dad had explained the quadrants to me, I was  better able to see that small differences grow into large differences when  measured over the years a person spends working. Because of the  CASHFLOW Quadrant, I knew it was better to decide, not so much  what I wanted to do, but more who I wanted to become as my working  years progressed. In the darkest hours, it was this deep knowledge, and  the lessons from two powerful dads, that kept me going. 
It Is More Than the Quadrant 
The CASHFLOW Quadrant is more than two lines and some  letters. If you look below the surface of this simple diagram, you will  find completely different worlds, as well as different ways of looking at  the world. As a person who has looked at the world from both the left  and the right sides, I can honestly say the world looks much different  depending on which side you are on.
21 
Chapter One 
One quadrant is not better than another. Each has strengths and  each has weaknesses. This book is written to give you a glimpse into  the different quadrants and into the personal development required to  be financially successful in each of them. It’s my belief that you’ll gain  further insights into choosing the financial life path that’s best suited  for you. 
Many of the skills essential to being successful on the right side of the  quadrant aren’t taught in school, which may explain how people like Bill  Gates, Ted Turner, and Thomas Edison left school early and yet learned  how to be successful B’s and I’s. This book will identify the skills, as well  as the personal core temperament, that are necessary for finding success  on the B and I side. First, I offer a broad overview of the four quadrants,  and then an in-depth focus on the B and I side.  
After reading this book, some of you might want to make a change  in how you earn your income, and some of you will be happy to stay  just where you are. You might choose to operate in more than one  quadrant, maybe even in all four quadrants. We’re all different, and  one quadrant isn’t more important or better than another. In every  village, town, city, and nation in the world, there is a need for people  to operate in all four quadrants in order to ensure the financial stability  of the community. 
Also, as we grow older and gain different experiences, our interests  change. For example, I notice that many young people right out of  school are often happy to get a job. But after a couple of years, a few  of them decide they aren’t interested in climbing the corporate ladder,  or they lose interest in their chosen field. These changes of age and  experience often cause a person to search for new avenues of growth,  challenge, financial reward, and personal happiness. I hope this book  offers some fresh ideas for attaining those goals. 
In short, this book isn’t about homelessness, but about finding a  home—a home in a quadrant or quadrants.
22 
Chapter Two 
DIFFERENT QUADRANTS,  DIFFERENT PEOPLE 
Changing quadrants is often  
a change at the core of who you are. 
“You can’t teach an old dog new tricks,” my highly educated dad always said. 
I had talked with him on several occasions, doing my best to  explain the CASHFLOW Quadrant, in an effort to give him some new  financial direction. Nearing 60 years of age, he was realizing that many  of his dreams weren’t going to be fulfilled. His “blacklisting” seemed to go  beyond the walls of state government. He was now blacklisting himself. “I tried it, but it didn’t work,” he said. 
My dad was referring to his attempts to be successful in the  S quadrant as a self-employed consultant, and as a B when he poured  much of his life savings into a famous ice-cream franchise that failed. 
Being bright, he conceptually understood the different technical  skills required in each of the four quadrants. He knew he could learn  them if he wanted to. But there was something else holding him back. 
One day over lunch, I talked to my rich dad about my educated dad. “Your father and I aren’t the same people at the core,” said rich dad. “While we both have fears, doubts, beliefs, strengths, and weaknesses,  we respond or handle those core similarities quite differently.”
23 
Chapter Two 
“Can you tell me the differences?” I asked. 
“Not over one lunch,” said rich dad. “But how we respond to those  differences is what causes us to remain in one quadrant or another. When  your dad tried to cross over from the E quadrant to the B quadrant,  intellectually he could understand the process, but he couldn’t handle it  emotionally. When things didn’t go smoothly and he began to lose money,  he didn’t know what to do to solve the problems, so he went back to the  quadrant he felt most comfortable in.” 
“The E and sometimes S quadrant,” I said. 
Rich dad nodded his head. “When the fear of losing money and  failing becomes too painful inside, a fear we both have, he chooses to  seek security and I choose to seek freedom.” 
“And that is the core difference,” I said, signaling the waiter for  our check. 
“Even though we’re all human beings,” said rich dad, “when it  comes to money and the emotions attached to money, we all respond  differently. And it’s how we respond to those emotions that often  determines which quadrant we choose to generate our income from.” “Different quadrants for different people,” I said. 
“That’s right,” said rich dad as we stood and headed for the door.  “And if you’re going to be successful in any quadrant, you need to have  more than just technical skills. You also need to know the core differences  that cause people to seek different quadrants. Know that, and life will be  much easier.” 
We were shaking hands and saying good-bye as the valet brought  my rich dad’s car around. 
“Oh, one last thing,” I said hurriedly. “Can my dad change?” “Oh sure,” said rich dad. “Anyone can change. But changing  
quadrants isn’t like changing jobs or changing professions. Changing  quadrants is often a change at the core of who you are—how you think  and how you look at the world. The change is easier for some people than  for others simply because some people welcome change and others fight  it. And changing quadrants is most often a life-changing experience. It’s  a change as profound as the age-old story of the caterpillar becoming a 
24 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
butterfly. Not only will you change, but so will your friends. While you’ll  still be friends with your old friends, it’s just harder for caterpillars to do  the same things butterflies do. So the changes are big changes, and not  too many people choose to make them.” 
The valet closed the door, and as my rich dad drove off, I was left  thinking about the core differences. 
What Are the Core Differences? 
How do I tell if people are an E, S, B, or I without knowing much  about them? One of the ways is by listening to their words. 
One of my rich dad’s greatest skills was being able to “read” people,  but he also believed you could not judge a book by its cover. Rich dad,  like Henry Ford, didn’t have an excellent education, but both men knew  how to hire and work with people who did. Rich dad always explained to  me that the ability to bring smart people together and work as a team was  one of his primary skills. 
When I was nine, my rich dad began to teach me the skills necessary  to be successful in the B and I quadrants. One of those skills was to get  beyond the surface of a person and gaze into their core. Rich dad used  to say, “If I listen to a person’s words, I begin to see and feel their souls.” 
So as a young boy, I began to sit in with my rich dad when he  hired people. From these interviews I learned to listen, not so much  for words, but for core values—values that my rich dad said came from  their souls. 
E-Quadrant Words 
A person who comes from the E (employee) quadrant might  say: “I am looking for a safe, secure job with good pay and  excellent benefits.”
25 
Chapter Two 
S-Quadrant Words 
A person who comes from the S (self-employed) quadrant might say: “My rate is $75 per hour.” Or “My normal commission rate is six percent  of the total price.” Or “I can’t seem to find people who want to work and  do the job right.” Or “I’ve got more than 20 hours into this project.” 
B-Quadrant Words 
A person operating out of the B (business-owner) quadrant might  say: “I’m looking for a new president to run my company.” 
I-Quadrant Words 
Someone operating out of the I (investor) quadrant might say: “Is  my cash flow based on an internal rate of return or net rate of return?” 
Words Are Tools 
Once my rich dad knew who the person he was interviewing was  at their core, at least for that moment, he would know what they were  really looking for, what he had to offer, and what words to use when  speaking to them. Rich dad always said, “Words are powerful tools.” 
Rich dad constantly reminded his son Mike and me of this. “If you  want to be a leader of people, then you need to be a master of words.” So one of the skills necessary to be a great B is to be a master of  words, knowing which words work on which kinds of people. He  trained us to first listen carefully to the words a person used. Then we  would know which words we should use and when to use them, in  order to respond to that person in the most effective way. 
Rich dad explained, “One word may excite one type of person  while that same word would completely turn off another person.” For example, the word “risk” might be exciting to a person in the  I quadrant, but evoke total fear to someone in the E quadrant. To be great leaders, rich dad stressed that we first had to be great  listeners. If you don’t listen to the words a person uses, you’ll never be  able to feel their soul. And if you don’t listen to their soul, you’ll never  know to whom you are talking.
26 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Core Differences 
The reason he would say, “Hear their words; feel their souls,” is  because behind the words a person chooses are the core values and core  differences of that individual. The following are some of the generalities  that separate people in one quadrant from those in another: 
1. The E (Employee) 
When I hear the words “secure” or “benefits,” I get a sense of  who the speaker might be at the core. The word “secure” is a  word often used in response to the emotion of fear. 
If a person feels fear, then the need for security is often a  
commonly used phrase for someone who comes predominantly  from the E quadrant. When it comes to money and jobs, there  are many people who simply hate the feeling of fear that comes  
with economic uncertainty: hence, the desire for security. The  word “benefit” means people would also like some kind of  
additional reward that is spelled out, a defined and assured extra  compensation, such as health insurance or a retirement plan.  
The key is that they want to feel secure and see it in writing. Uncertainty doesn’t make them happy; certainty does. Their  internal workings say, “I’ll give you this if you promise to give  me that in return.” 
They want their fear reduced by the presence of some degree of  certainty, so they seek security and strong agreements when it  comes to employment. They’re accurate when they say, “I’m not  that interested in money.” For them, the idea of security is often  more important than money. 
27 
Chapter Two 
Employees can be presidents of companies or janitors. It’s not  so much what they do, but the contractual agreement they have  with the person or organization that hires them. 
2. The S (Self-employed) 
These are people who want to “be their own boss” or like to “do  their own thing.” I call this group the “do-it-yourselfers.” 
Often, when it comes to the subject of money, a hard-core  
S doesn’t like to have his or her income dependent on other  people. In other words, if S’s work hard, they expect to get paid  for their work.  
S’s don’t like having the amount of money they earn dictated by someone else or by a group of people who might not work as  hard as they do. If they work hard, they expect to be paid well.  
Conversely, they also understand that if they don’t work hard,  then they don’t deserve to be paid much. When it comes to  money, they have fiercely independent souls. 
The Emotion of Fear 
So while the E often responds to the fear of not having money by  seeking security, the S often responds differently. The people in this  quadrant respond to fear, not by seeking security, but by taking control  of the situation and doing it on their own. That is why I call the  S group the do-it-yourself group. When it comes to fear and financial  risk, they want to take the bull by the horns.
28 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
In this group you find well-educated professionals who spend years  in school, such as doctors, lawyers, and dentists. Also in the S group  are people who took educational paths other than, or in addition to,  traditional school. In this group are direct-commission salespeople and  real estate agents as well as small business owners like retail shopkeepers,  cleaners, restaurateurs, consultants, therapists, travel agents, car mechanics, plumbers, carpenters, preachers, electricians, hair stylists,  and artists. 
This group’s favorite song would be either “Nobody Does It Better”  or “I Did It My Way.” 
Self-employed people are often hard-core perfectionists. They often  want to do something exceptionally well. In their mind, they don’t  think anyone else does it better than they do, so they really don’t trust  anyone else to do it. In many respects, they are true artists with their  own style and methods of doing things. 
And that is why we hire them. If you hire a brain surgeon, you  want that brain surgeon to have had years of training and experience,  but most importantly, you want this brain surgeon to be a perfectionist.  The same goes for a dentist, hairstylist, marketing consultant, plumber,  electrician, lawyer or a corporate trainer. You, as the client hiring this  person, want someone who is the best. 
For people in this group, money isn’t the most important thing  about their work. Their independence, the freedom to do things  their way, and being respected as experts in their field are much more  important than mere money. When hiring them, it’s best to tell them  what you want done and then leave them alone to do it. They don’t  need or want supervision. If you meddle too much, they’ll simply walk  off the job and tell you to hire someone else. Remember, independence  trumps money for this group. 
They often have a hard time hiring other people to do what they do  simply because, in their mind, nobody else is up to the task. Also, if this  group trains someone to do what they do, that newly trained person  often ends up leaving to “do their own thing,” to “be their own boss,” to  “do things their way,” or to “have a chance to express their individuality.”
29 
Chapter Two 
Many S types are hesitant to hire and train other people because,  once trained, they often end up as their competition. This, in turn,  keeps the S types working harder at doing things on their own. 
3. The B (Business owner) 
This group of people could almost be the opposite of the S.  Those who are true B’s like to surround themselves with smart  people from all four categories: E, S, B, and I. Unlike the S,  who doesn’t like to delegate work (because no one can do it  better), the B likes to delegate. The true motto of a B is, “Why  do it yourself when you can hire someone to do it for you, and  they can do it better?” 
Henry Ford fit this mold. As one popular story goes, a group  of so-called intellectuals came by to condemn Ford for being  ignorant. They claimed he really didn’t know much. So Ford  invited them into his office and challenged them to ask him  
any question, and he would answer it. So this panel assembled  around America’s most powerful industrialist and began to ask  him questions. Ford listened to their questions and, when they  were through, he simply reached for several phones on his desk  
and called in some of his bright assistants and asked them to  give the panel the answers they sought.  
He ended by informing the panel that he’d rather hire smart  people who went to school to come up with answers so he  
could leave his mind clear to do more important tasks, tasks  like thinking. 
One of the quotes credited to Ford goes: “Thinking is the  
hardest work there is. That is why so few people engage in it.”
30 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Leadership Is Bringing Out the Best in People  
My rich dad’s idol was Henry Ford. He had me read books about  people like Ford and John D. Rockefeller, the founder of Standard  Oil. Rich dad constantly encouraged Mike and me to learn the essence  of leadership and the technical skills of business. In retrospect, I  understand now that many people may have one or the other, but  to be a successful B, you really do need to have both. I also now  realize that both skills can be learned. There is a science, as well as an  art, to business and leadership. For me, both are lifelong studies. 
When I was a boy, my rich dad gave me the children’s book  Stone Soup, written in 1947 by Marcia Brown and still available today.  He had me read this book to begin my training as a leader in business. 
“Leadership,” rich dad said, “is the ability to bring out the best in  people.” So he trained his son and me in the technical skills necessary  for becoming successful in business—technical skills such as reading  financial statements, marketing, sales, accounting, management,  production, and negotiation. Throughout each lesson, he stressed  that we needed to learn to work with and lead people. Rich dad always  said, “The technical skills of business are easy. The hard part is working  with people.” As a reminder, I still read Stone Soup today because  I personally have a tendency to be a tyrant, instead of a leader, when  things don’t go my way.
31 
Chapter Two 
Entrepreneurial Development 
I often hear the words, “I’m going to start my own business.”  Many people tend to believe that the way to financial security and  happiness is to do your own thing or to develop a new product no one  else has. So they rush out and start their own business. In many cases,  this is the path they take: 
Many wind up starting an S type of business and not a B type of  business. Again, one is not necessarily better than the other. Both have  different strengths, weaknesses, risks, and rewards. But many people  who want to start a B type of business wind up with an S type of  business and become stalled in their quest to move to the right side.  Many new entrepreneurs want to do this:
32 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
But they wind up instead doing this and getting stuck there: Many then attempt to do this: 
But only a few who attempt this actually make it. Why? Because  the technical skills and human skills to be successful in each quadrant  are different. You must learn the skills and mindset required by a  quadrant in order to find true success there.
33 
Chapter Two 
The Difference Between an S Type of Business and a  B Type of Business 
Those who are true B’s can leave their business for a year or more  and return to find their business more profitable and running better  than when they left it. In a true S type of business, if the S left for a  year or more, chances are there would be no business left to return to. 
So what causes the difference? Saying it simply, an S owns a job;  a B owns a system and then hires competent people to operate the  system. Or put another way, in many cases, the S is the system. That  is why they can’t leave. 
For example, let’s take a look at a typical dentist. A dentist spends  years in school learning to become a self-contained system. You, the  client, get a toothache. You go see your dentist. He fixes your tooth.  You pay and go home. You’re happy and you tell all of your friends  about your great dentist. In most cases, the dentist can do the entire  job by himself. The problem is that if the dentist goes on vacation, so  does his income. 
B business owners can go on vacation forever because they own a  system, not a job. If the B is on vacation, the money still comes in. To be successful as a B requires: 
1. Ownership or control of systems, and 
2. The ability to lead people. 
For S’s to evolve into B’s they need to convert who they are and what  they know into a system, and many aren’t able to do that. Or they’re  often too attached to the system to let go and let other people in. 
Can You Make a Better Hamburger Than McDonald’s? Many people come to me for advice on how to start a company or  how to raise money for a new product or idea. 
I listen, usually for about 10 minutes, and within that time I can  tell where their focus is. Is it the product or the business system? In  those 10 minutes, I most often hear words such as these: (Remember  the importance of being a good listener and allowing words to direct  you to the core values of a person’s soul.)
34 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
•   “This is a far better product than company XYZ makes.” •   “I’ve looked everywhere, and nobody has this product.” 
•   “I’ll give you the idea for this product; all I want is 25 percent of the profits.” 
•   “I’ve been working on this (product, book, music score,     invention) for years.” 
These are the words of a person generally operating from the left  side, the E-S side. 
It’s important to be gentle at this time because I’m dealing  
with core values and ideas that have been entrenched for years,  maybe handed down for generations. If I’m not gentle or patient,  I could damage a fragile and sensitive launch of an idea and, more  importantly, a human being ready to evolve into another quadrant. 
The Hamburger and the Business 
Since I need to be gentle, at this point in the conversation, I often  use the “McDonald’s hamburger” example for clarification. After  listening to their pitch, I slowly ask, “Can you personally make a better  hamburger than McDonald’s?” 
So far, 100 percent of the people I’ve talked with about their new  idea or product have said yes. They can all prepare, cook and serve a  better quality hamburger than McDonald’s. 
Next I ask them, “Can you personally build a better business  system than McDonald’s?” 
Some people see the difference immediately, and some don’t.  And I would say the difference is whether the person is fixated on  the left side of the quadrant, which is focused on the idea of the better  burger, or on the right side of the quadrant, which is focused on the  business system. 
I do my best to explain that there are a lot of entrepreneurs out  there offering far superior products or services than are offered by  the mega-rich multinational corporations, just as there are billions  of people who can make a better burger than McDonald’s. But only  McDonald’s has created the system that has served billions of burgers.
35 
Chapter Two 
See the Other Side 
If people can begin to see this truth, I then suggest they go to  McDonald’s, buy a burger, and sit and look at the system that  delivered that burger. Take note of the trucks that delivered the raw  burger, the rancher that raised the beef, the buyer who bought the  beef and the TV ads that helped sell the beef. Notice the training of  young inexperienced people to say the same words, “Hello, welcome to  McDonald’s,” as well as the decor of the franchise, the regional offices,  the bakeries that bake the buns and the millions of pounds of French  fries that taste exactly the same all over the world. Then include the  stockbrokers raising money for McDonald’s on Wall Street. If they  can begin to understand the whole picture, then they have a chance at  moving to the B-I side. 
The reality is that there are unlimited new ideas, billions of people  with services or products to offer, millions of products, and only a few  people who know how to build excellent business systems. 
Bill Gates didn’t build a great product. He bought somebody else’s  product and built a powerful global system around it. 
4. The I (Investor) 
Investors make money with money. They don’t have to work  
because their money is working for them. 
The I quadrant is the playground of the rich. Regardless of which  quadrant people make their money in, if they hope someday to  be rich, they ultimately must come to the I quadrant. It’s in the  I quadrant that money becomes converted to wealth.
36 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
The CASHFLOW Quadrant 
The CASHFLOW Quadrant simply makes distinctions on how  income is generated, whether as an E (Employee), S (Self-employed),  B (Business owner) or I (Investor). The differences are summarized below. 
You own a system 
and people work  
for you. 
You have a job. 
Money works  
for you. 
You own a job.
OPT and OPM 
Most of us have heard that the secrets to great riches and wealth are: •   OPT — Other People’s Time 
•   OPM — Other People’s Money 
OPT and OPM are found in the B and I quadrants. For the most  part, people who work in the E and S quadrants are the OP (Other  People) whose time and money are being used. 
A primary reason Kim and I took time to build a B type of business,  rather than an S type, was because we recognized the long-term benefit  of using other people’s time. One of the drawbacks to being a successful  S is that success simply means more hard work. In other words, good  work results in more hard work and longer hours. 
In designing a B type of business, success simply means increasing  the system and hiring more people. In other words, you work less, earn  more and enjoy more free time. 
37 
Chapter Two 
The remainder of this book goes through the skills and mindset  required for the right side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant. It’s my  experience that being successful on the right side requires a different  mindset and different technical skills. If people are flexible enough to  make these changes, I think they’ll find the process of achieving greater  financial security or freedom easy. For other people, the process might be  too difficult because many people are frozen in one quadrant and  one mindset. 
At a minimum, you’ll find out why some people work less, earn  more, pay less in taxes and feel more financially secure than others. It’s  simply a matter of knowing which quadrant to work out of and when. 
A Guide to Freedom 
The CASHFLOW Quadrant is not a set of rules. It’s only a guide  for those who wish to use it. It guided Kim and me from financial  struggle, to financial security, and then to financial freedom.  
The Difference Between the Rich and Everyone Else A few years ago, I read an article that said most rich people receive  70 percent of their income from investments, or the I quadrant, and  less than 30 percent from wages, or the E quadrant. If they were an E,  chances are that they were employees of their own corporation. Their  income looked like this: 
<30% 
70%
38 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
For most everyone else, the poor and the middle class, at least 80  percent of their income comes from wages from the E or S quadrants,  and less than 20 percent from investments in the I quadrant. 
>— 
80% 
<20% 
—> 80%
The Difference Between Being Rich and Being Wealthy In chapter one, I wrote that Kim and I were millionaires by 1989,  but we weren’t financially free until 1994. There’s a difference between  being rich and being wealthy. By 1989, our business was making us a lot  of money. We were earning more and working less because the business  system was growing without any more physical effort on our part. We  had achieved what most people would consider financial success. However, we still needed to convert the cash flow coming from the  business into even more tangible assets that would generate additional  cash flow. We had grown our business into a success. Now it was time  to focus on growing our assets to the point where the cash flow from  all of our assets would be greater than our living expenses.  
39 
Chapter Two 
INCOME STATEMENT
Income 
Expenses 
BALANCE SHEET 
Assets 
Business 
Liabilities 
By 1994, the passive income from all of our assets was greater than  our expenses. At that point, we were wealthy. 
Our business is considered an asset because it generated income  and operated without much physical input. For our own personal  sense of wealth, we wanted to make sure we also had tangible assets,  such as real estate and stocks, that were throwing off more passive  income than our expenses before we claimed to be wealthy. Once the  income coming from tangible assets in our asset column was greater  than the money coming in from the business, we sold the business to  our partner. We were now wealthy. 
The Definition of Wealth 
The definition of wealth is the number of days you can survive  without physically working (or anyone else in your household physically  working) and still maintain your standard of living. 
40 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
For example, if your monthly expenses are $5,000 a month and  you have $20,000 in savings, your wealth is approximately four  months or 120 days. Wealth is measured in time, not dollars. 
By 1994, Kim and I were wealthy indefinitely (barring great  economic changes) because the income from our investments was  greater than our monthly expenses. 
Ultimately, it’s not how much money you make that matters, but  how much money you keep, and how long that money works for you.  Every day I meet many people who make a lot of money, but all of  their money goes out the expense column.  
Every time they make a little more money, they go shopping.  They often buy a bigger house or new car which results in long-term  debt and more hard work. Nothing is left to go into the asset column.  The money goes out so fast that you’d think they took some kind of  financial laxative. Their cash-flow pattern looks like this: 
Job 
Income 
Expenses Assets 
Liabilities
41 
Chapter Two 
Red-Line Finances 
In the world of cars, there’s a saying about “keeping the engine at  red line.” “Red line” means the throttle is keeping the RPMs of the  engine close to the red line, the maximum speed the car’s engine can  maintain without blowing up. 
Many people, rich and poor, operate constantly at the financial  red line of their personal finances. No matter how much money they  make, they spend it as fast as it comes in. The trouble with operating  your car’s engine at red line is that the life expectancy of the engine  is shortened. The same is true with operating your finances at the  red line. 
Several of my doctor friends say that one of the main problems  they see today is stress caused by working hard and never having  enough money. One says that the biggest cause of health disorders  is something she calls “cancer of the wallet.” 
Money Making Money 
Regardless of how much money people make, ultimately they  should put some in the I quadrant. The I quadrant is where your  money makes more money. It’s based on the idea that your money  works hard so you don’t have to work. Although the I quadrant is  important to your financial health, there are other forms of investing  worth noting.  
Other Forms of Investing 
People invest in their education. Traditional education is important.  The more education you have, the better your chances may be to earn  more money, depending on your choice of profession. Given that the  average person spends 40 years or more actively working, college or  some type of higher education may be a good investment. 
Giving your loyalty and best efforts to an employer is another  form of investment. In return, via contract, the employee is rewarded  with a pension for life. This was a form of investment popular in the  Industrial Age that is now almost obsolete in the Information Age.
42 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Other people invest in having large families and, in turn, have their  children care for them in their old age. That form of investing was the  norm in the past, yet due to economic constraints in the present, it has  become more difficult for families to handle the living and medical  expenses of parents. 
Government retirement programs such as Social Security and  Medicare, which are often paid for through payroll deductions, are  another form of investment mandated by law. Due to massive changes  in demographics and costs, this form of investment will probably not  be able to keep many of the promises it has made.  
And there are independent investment vehicles for retirement that  are called individual retirement plans. Often, the federal government will  offer tax incentives to both the employer and employee to participate in  such plans. In America, one popular plan is the 401(k) retirement plan.  In countries such as Australia, they are called superannuation plans.  
Income Received from Investments 
Although the above are all forms of investing, the I quadrant  focuses on investments that generate income on an ongoing basis  during your working years. So to qualify as a person who operates  as an I, use the same criteria used in all the other quadrants. Do you  receive current income from the I quadrant? In other words, is your  money working for you and generating current income for you? 
Let’s look at a person who buys a house as an investment and rents  it out. If the rent collected is greater than the expenses to operate the  property, that income is coming from the I quadrant. The same is true  for people who receive interest from savings, or dividends from stocks  and bonds. So the qualifier for the I quadrant is how much income  you generate from the quadrant without working in it. 
Is My Retirement Account a Form of Investment? Regularly putting money into a retirement account is the form of  investing people in the E quadrant are most encouraged to take. These  retirement plans are not without risk and, even when they perform,  the rate of return is never going to make you financially free. Most of 
43 
Chapter Two 
us want to be investors when our working years are over, but for the  sake of this book, the I quadrant represents a person whose income  comes from investments during their working years. In reality, most  
people aren’t investing in a retirement account. Instead, most are  saving money in their retirement account, hoping that when they  retire, there will be more money coming out than they put in. 
There’s a difference between people who save money in their  retirement accounts and people who, through investing, actively  use their money to make more money as income. 
Are Stockbrokers Investors? 
Many financial advisors in the investment world are, by definition,  not really people who generate their income from the I quadrant. For example, most stockbrokers, real estate agents, financial advisors,  bankers, and accountants are predominantly E’s or S’s. In other words,  their income comes from their professional work, not necessarily from  assets they own. 
I have friends who are stock traders. They buy stocks low and hope  to sell high. In reality, their profession is trading, much like a person  who owns a retail shop and buys items at wholesale and sells them at  retail. There’s still something they physically must do to generate the  money, so they would fit more into the S quadrant than the I quadrant. 
Can all of these people be investors? The answer is yes, but it is  important to know the difference between someone who earns money  from commissions, sells advice by the hour, or tries to buy low and sell  high compared to someone who earns money from spotting or creating  good investments. 
There’s one way to find out how good your advisors are: Ask them  what percentage of their income comes from commissions or fees versus  the percentage that comes from passive income from their investments  or other businesses they own. 
I have several CPA friends who tell me, without violating client  confidentiality, that many professional investment advisors have little  in the way of income from investments. In other words, “They don’t  practice what they preach.”
44 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
Advantages of Income from the I Quadrant 
So the primary distinction of people who earn their money from  the I quadrant is that they focus on having their money make money. If  they’re good at it, they can have that money work for them and for their  family for hundreds of years. 
Besides the obvious advantages of knowing how to make money  with money and not having to get up and go to work, there are also  many tax advantages that aren’t available to people who have to work  for their money. 
One of the reasons the rich get richer is because they can make  millions and pay, legally, little or no tax on that money. That’s because  they make money in the asset column, not in the income column.  They make money as investors, not workers. 
Moreover, people who work for money are often taxed at higher  rates than investors, and their taxes are withheld from their wages. They  never even see that portion of their income. 
Why Aren’t More People Investors? 
The I quadrant is the quadrant for working less, earning more, and  paying less in taxes. So why aren’t more people investors? The reason is  the same reason many people don’t start their own businesses. It can be  summed up in one word: risk. 
Many people don’t like the idea of handing over their hard-earned  money and, possibly, not having it come back. Many people are so afraid  of losing that they choose not to invest, no matter how much money  they could make in return. 
A Hollywood celebrity once said: “It’s not return on the investment  that I worry about. It’s the return of the investment.” 
This fear of losing money seems to divide investors into four  broad categories: 
1. People who are risk-averse and do nothing but play it safe,  keeping their money in the bank 
2. People who turn the job of investing over to someone else,  such as a financial advisor or a mutual-fund manager 
3. Gamblers 
4. Investors
45 
Chapter Two 
The difference between a gambler and an investor is simple. For a  gambler, investing is a game of chance. For an investor, investing is a game  of skill. And for the people who turn their money over to someone else to  
invest, investing is often a game they don’t want to learn. The important  thing for these individuals is to choose a financial advisor carefully. Later in this book, I’ll go into the five levels of investors which  should shed more light on this subject. 
Risk Can Be Virtually Eliminated 
The good news about investing is that risk can be greatly minimized  or even eliminated, and you can still receive high yields on your money,  if you know the game. 
A true investor wants to recoup his or her money quickly. People  who have a retirement account have to wait years to find out if they’ll  ever get their money back. This is the most extreme difference between a  professional investor and someone who sets money aside for retirement. 
It’s the fear of losing money that causes most people to seek security.  Yet the I quadrant is not as treacherous as many people think. The  I quadrant is like any other quadrant. It has its own skills and mindset.  The skills to be successful in the I quadrant can be learned if you’re  willing to take the time to learn. 
A New Age Begins 
In 1989 the Berlin Wall was torn down, as was communism. This,  in my opinion, signaled the end of the Industrial Age and the start of  the Information Age.  
The Difference Between Industrial-Age Pension Plans and  Information-Age Pension Plans 
The voyage of Columbus in 1492 roughly coincides with the start  of the Industrial Age. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 is the event that  marked the end of that age. For some reason, it seems that every 500  years in modern history, great cataclysmic changes occur. We’re in one  such period right now.
46 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
That change has already threatened the financial security of  
hundreds of millions of people, most of whom are not yet aware of  the financial impact of that change and many of whom can’t afford it.  The change is found in the difference between an Industrial-Age pension  plan and an Information-Age pension plan. 
When I was a boy, my rich dad encouraged me to take risks with my  money and learn to invest. He’d always say, “If you want to get rich, you  need to learn how to take risks. Learn to be an investor.” 
At home I told my educated dad about my rich dad’s suggestion that  we learn how to invest and manage risk. My educated dad replied,  “I don’t need to learn how to invest. I have a government pension plan,  a pension from the teachers union, and guaranteed Social Security  benefits. Why take risks with my money?” 
My educated dad believed in Industrial-Age pension plans, such as  government-employee pensions and Social Security. He was happy when  I signed up for the U.S. Marine Corps. Instead of being worried that  I might lose my life in Vietnam, he simply said, “Stay in for 20 years,  and you’ll get a pension and medical benefits for life.” 
Although still in use, such pension plans are becoming obsolete.  The idea of a company being financially responsible for your retirement  and the government picking up the balance of your retirement needs  through pension schemes is an old, outdated idea. 
People Need to Become Investors 
As we move from defined-benefit pension plans (or what I call  Industrial-Age retirement plans) to defined-contribution pension  plans (or Information-Age pension plans), the result is that you, as an  individual, must now be financially responsible for yourself. Amazingly,  few people have noticed the change and understand its ramifications. 
Industrial-Age Pension Plans 
In the Industrial Age, a defined-benefit pension plan meant that  the company guaranteed you, the worker, a defined amount of money  (usually paid monthly) for as long as you lived. People felt secure because  these plans assured a steady income.
47 
Chapter Two 
Information-Age Pension Plans 
But in 1974, the rules changed with the passage of the Employee  Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). Suddenly, companies were no  longer guaranteeing financial security at the end of your working days.  Instead, employers began offering defined-contribution retirement plans.  “Defined contribution” means that you only get back what you and the  company have contributed while you were working. In other words,  your pension is defined solely by what has been contributed. If you and  your company put no money in, then you get no money out. 
The good news is that, in the Information Age, life expectancy has  increased. The bad news is that you might outlive your pension (if you  even have one). 
Risky Pension Plans 
What many people don’t understand is that whatever you and  your employer put into the plan is no longer guaranteed to exist  when you decide to pull it out. This is because plans like the 401(k)  and the superannuation are subject to market forces. In other  words, one day you could have a million dollars in the account.  But, if there were a stock-market crash, which every market  occasionally has, your million dollars could be cut in half or even  wiped out. With defined-contribution plans, the guarantee of  lifelong income is gone. 
People today, who retire at age 65 and begin to live on their  
defined-contribution plan, could run out of money by, let’s say, age 75.  Then what do they do? Dust off the resumé? 
And what about the government’s defined-benefit pension plan?  Well, in the United States, Social Security is expected to be bankrupt  by the year 2037, with Medicare bankrupt by 2017. Even today, Social  Security doesn’t provide much in the way of income. What will happen  when 77 million baby boomers begin to want the money they paid in,  but it’s not there? 
In 1998, President Clinton’s popular cry of “Save Social Security”  was well received. Yet as Democratic Senator Ernest Hollings pointed 
48 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
out, “Obviously, the first way to save Social Security is to stop looting  it.” For decades, the federal government has been responsible for  “borrowing” the retirement money for expenditures: a government sanctioned Ponzi scheme. 
Many politicians seem to think that Social Security is income that  can be spent, rather than an asset that should be held in trust. 
Too Many People Counting on the Government 
I write my books and create products, such as the educational  CASHFLOW board game, because the Industrial Age is history, and  we must prepare for the opportunities of the Information Age. 
My concern as a private citizen is that, from my generation forward,  we aren’t properly prepared to handle the differences between the  Industrial Age and the Information Age. A case in point is how we  prepare financially for our retirement years. The idea of “go to school  and get a safe, secure job” was a good one for people born before 1930.  Today, everyone needs to go to school to prepare for a job or career,  but we also need to know how to invest—and investing is not a subject  taught in school. 
One of the problems created by the Industrial Age is that too many  people are dependent upon the government to solve their individual  problems. Today we’re facing even bigger problems because we have  delegated our personal financial responsibility to the government.  
It’s estimated that by the year 2020, there will be 275 million  Americans, with 100 million of them expecting some kind of government  support. This will include federal employees, military retirees, postal  workers, teachers, other government employees, and retirees expecting  Social Security and Medicare payments. They’re contractually correct in  expecting government support because, in one way or another, most  have been investing into that promise throughout their working lives.  Unfortunately, there were too many promises made for too many years.  Now the bill is coming due. 
I don’t think those financial promises can be kept. If our government  begins to raise taxes even higher to pay for those promises, those who can 
49 
Chapter Two 
escape will escape to countries that have lower taxes. In the Information  Age, the term “offshore” won’t necessarily mean another country as a tax  haven. Offshore could mean cyberspace. 
A Great Change Is at Hand 
I recall President John F. Kennedy warning, “A great change is at  hand.” Well, that change is here. 
Investing without Being Investors 
The change from defined-benefit to defined-contribution pension  plans is forcing millions of people throughout the world to become  investors, with little investor education. Many people who have spent  their lives avoiding financial risks are now being forced to take them.  Most will find out when it comes time to retire whether they were wise  investors, or careless gamblers. 
Today, the stock market is fueled by many things, one of which is  non-investors trying to become investors. Their financial path looks  like this:
50 
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
A large majority of these people, the E’s and S’s, are people who by  nature are security-oriented. That’s why they seek secure jobs or start small  businesses they can control. Because of the defined-contribution retirement  
plans, they’re migrating today to the I quadrant where they hope they’ll find  security when their working years are over. Unfortunately, the I quadrant is  not known for its security. The I quadrant is the quadrant of risk. 
Because so many people on the left side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant come looking for security, the stock market responds in kind.  That’s why you often hear the following words: 
1. Diversification 
People who seek security use the word “diversification” a lot.  Why? Because the strategy of diversification is an investment  strategy for “not losing.” It’s not an investment strategy for  
winning. Successful or rich investors don’t diversify. They focus  their efforts. 
Warren Buffett, possibly the world’s greatest investor, says this  about diversification: “The strategy we’ve adopted precludes our  following standard diversification dogma. Many pundits would  therefore say the strategy must be riskier than that employed  by more conventional investors. We disagree. We believe that  a policy of portfolio concentration may well decrease risk if it  raises, as it should, both the intensity with which an investor  thinks about a business and the comfort level he must feel with  its economic characteristics before buying into it.” 
In other words, Warren Buffett is saying that portfolio  
concentration, or focusing on a few investments rather than  diversifying, is a better strategy. In his mind, concentration  rather than diversification requires you to become smarter and  more intense in your thoughts and actions. His article goes on  to say that average investors avoid volatility because they think  volatility is risky. Warren Buffet says instead, “In fact, the true  investor welcomes volatility.”
51